Personal Productivity MCP Agent

A beginner-friendly AI-powered productivity assistant built with Python, Streamlit, OpenAI API, and the Model Context Protocol (MCP). The application demonstrates how an AI agent dynamically discovers and invokes tools from a local MCP server based on natural language requests, without requiring users to manually select tools.

Features
🤖 Chat-based AI assistant using OpenAI
🔌 Local MCP Server using FastMCP with stdio transport
📂 File management tools
Create, read, rename, move, delete files
Create folders
Save JSON data
📝 Notes management
Save persistent notes
Search notes by keyword
Retrieve current system date and time
🌦️ Live Weather
Uses Open-Meteo API (no API key required)
Current weather, temperature, humidity, wind speed, precipitation, and forecast
🔍 Live Web Search
Uses Tavily Search API for real-time news and information
💬 Intelligent tool selection
The AI automatically decides which MCP tool(s) to call based on the user's request
🔄 Multi-step task execution
Example:
Check weather
Search latest AI news
Summarize results
Save the report to a text file
📊 Streamlit Chat Interface
Chat history
Tool execution logs
MCP server status
Available tools, prompts, and resources displayed in the sidebar
Tech Stack
Python
Streamlit
OpenAI API
Model Context Protocol (MCP)
FastMCP
Open-Meteo API
Tavily Search API
python-dotenv
Project Structure
personal_productivity_mcp_agent/
│
├── mcp-server/
│   └── server.py
│
├── mcp-client/
│   └── client.py
│
├── workspace/
├── app.py
├── requirements.txt
├── .env
├── .env.example
└── README.md
How It Works
The user enters a request in the Streamlit chat interface.
The OpenAI model analyzes the request.
The MCP client discovers the available tools exposed by the local MCP server.
The AI selects the appropriate tool(s).
The MCP server executes the requested operations.
Results are returned to the AI and displayed in the chat interface.
Example Prompts
Create a file named notes.txt with today's meeting notes.
Search my saved notes for "Python".
Check the weather in Pune.
Find the latest AI news.
Summarize the latest AI news and save it as ai_report.txt.
Create a folder called Projects and move report.txt into it.
Environment Variables

Create a .env file:

OPENAI_API_KEY=your_openai_api_key
TAVILY_API_KEY=your_tavily_api_key

Note: I initially used a Google App Password instead of a Tavily API key, which prevented the live web search feature from returning current information. Replacing it with a valid Tavily API key resolved the issue.

Learning Outcomes
Building AI agents with the Model Context Protocol (MCP)
Dynamic tool discovery and execution
OpenAI function/tool calling
Integrating third-party APIs
Creating conversational applications with Streamlit
Designing multi-step AI workflows
Managing environment variables securely with .env

This project demonstrates how MCP enables AI applications to dynamically discover and use external tools, making the assistant more flexible, modular, and capable of handling complex productivity tasks through natural language.
